We're talking to Mr. Max Israel.
If you could just start and tell me about your family.
You come from a family of booksellers.
Booksellers, yeah.
Well, my father was a bookseller, and he had three brothers, and they're all three booksellers.
The oldest one was murdered by the Germans on his trip to
to Switzerland.
First, my youngest brother went to Switzerland and succeeded.
And my old brother missed the parents-in-law of my youngest brother to follow, but they were they were
Capture by the Germans and brothers.
This is your uncle?
Who was captured by the Germans?
My older brother and the parents-in-law of my younger brother.
And what were their names?
Could you tell me their names of your brothers?
Solomon.
How do you spell?
S-A-L-O-M-O.
And he was captioned.
Yes, he was, he was forgotten.
I had to ask, I had to ask.
That's okay, no, no, we'll come back to it, yeah.
Yeah, I like that.
He knows English better.
He's in the graduate of English, so.
And you learned, was your grandfather a bookseller too?
My grandfather, yeah, my father was a bookseller.
And so how did he start in the, how did he start in the business?
How did he start in the business?
Well, by luck, but he studied for Robin, came in touch with the socialism, and saw socialism is better as religion.
And so I stopped with his study at the seminarium, and became a bookseller in Arnhem.
And he had three friends.
First, yes, and all four became booksellers.
What was it about the business that attracted you to become a bookseller?
Well, as a child, I was already interested in books.
I was at the primary school, and I said, I remember that I said to my teacher to ask me, what do you like to be in...
and future.
That's a bookseller.
And what kinds of things did your father teach you about books?
Well, you start what your father says.
But does he teach you things like bibliography, how to... Well, that I've done myself.
My most name is from my older brother.
And, you know, in fact, as I did bibliography.
Mm-hmm.
This was up in Arnhem first, right?
In Arnhem, yes.
But after the war in 1945, I went to Amsterdam.
In 1945, you came to Amsterdam?
Yes, and... ...with my younger brother.
Mm-hmm.
Um... Were you in business before the war?
Yeah.
I was the only profession I had a bookseller.
Uh-huh.
But I mean, before the war, you were in the book business.
Yes, at Arnhem.
At Arnhem.
And you had to... No, I was 50 when I entered the bookshop.
Mm-hmm.
So, during the war you hid, right?
I was hid in Yeshua.
Where?
Could you tell me a little bit about that?
Well, I was hid in... Well, I was different addresses.
Plus, I was...
with the parents of a companion of me in prison, and I went to them to say hello and to tell them how her son was.
We were together next in the cell of the prison, and we promised each other.
He was, when he was free, he should go to my mother, and when I was free, I should go to his parents, you know.
And then I said, can I come here when I had to be hidden?
Then they said yes, but it lasted only a few weeks, and I was near the
Well, it's better perhaps I was... Okay.
Yeah.
I was, I, I, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was, I was,
Do you mind helping us with the translation?
Yes, sure.
Because we were talking about, I asked him, we were talking about the war and how he managed, and I really couldn't pick up much of what he was saying about how he managed to hide during the war.
How, how, how he managed to hide during the war.
How, how, how he managed to hide during the
I came in a family in the center of a wood, who was a boatmaker.
A forest, Mr. Israel managed to reach people who lived in the middle of a forest, very secluded, and there he stayed.
Was that near Arnhem?
Yes, in the vicinity of Arnhem.
Was he by himself?
Alain, he was alone.
I was alone, yes.
By himself.
It was about first he met from Arnhem.
And how long, how long did you manage to stay out there?
Well, I managed 15 minutes and then I had to change because one of my assistant, my former assistant was called by the Germans.
I was afraid that we could
to disclose his position at that moment.
So after about 15 months he had to... So what year roughly are we talking about?
Well, I stayed there and then I came...
with other people and I came in the neighborhood of that place where I was hidden and came in with
What's the concern?
The housekeeper?
The housekeeper in hospital.
And there I stayed for the liberation, nearly.
So about three years.
Hmm?
About three years, maybe?
Yeah, I think so, yeah.
Eighteen months or so.
Now, when did he... This he was hiding because he was Jewish, of course, right?
Yes.
And you knew, of course, that
I mean there was no secret that if you were Jewish you were in grave danger.
I mean you knew this of course.
Of course.
Before I was in the underground and that was the reason I was in the hospital.
And present.
He was in the underground?
Is that what he said?
For secrets, yeah.
He was in hiding already and then he was
I was in Schevelingen prison for six months.
How do you spell that?
S-C-H-E-V-E-N-I-T-E.
And then after six months I was transferred to the concentration camp in Amerford.
And I stayed there for three months and then I was released.
Now, he was kept prisoner by the Germans?
By the Germans.
And you were released.
Yeah, but... Yeah, it was luck.
By chance.
What was the... What was the... What was the... What was the... What was the... I was convicted for three months in concentration camp.
and that was in Amersfoort Amersfoort A-M-E-R-S A-M-E-R-S F-O-O-R-T and that's here in Holland but that was a German prison a German concentration camp German concentration camp but sometimes run
Well, the keepers there were, of course, not only Germans, but also... Yeah, they were all the Germans.
Alleen dan?
There's geen Nederlanders erbij.
Did you have fears that you would not live?
I mean, did you think that while you were held prisoner?
Well, fear you had... you had a lot of fear.
Of course I had fear that I would be caught, but I was very... was it?
Careful?
And let's jump ahead to liberation and after the war and you come back to the book business.
What did you find?
Well, what I found was that we had nothing anymore, you know.
That all the books by my father and brothers had together had in stock, lost, and was sold by the Germans.
Hmm.
So we had to start again, again.
You.
And, yeah, my brother died here in Amsterdam.
He started.
So you decided to move here to Amsterdam?
Yes, well.
So how did you start looking for books?
Where, where did you look?
Were there a lot of books available?
No, I, I had nearly no books.
If you know that we had a fine shop and a bit, a great warehouse.
And business in Nijmegen.
And then in Amsterdam.
Then there was nearly nothing over.
Nothing left.
Tens of thousands of books.
What did he say?
They lost ten thousands of books?
Tens of thousands.
Really storage high.
The building in Arnhem was huge.
And they had warehouses.
They had business in Nijmegen.
Were the books stolen or were they destroyed?
They were taken away.
They were sold, sold at auction.
By the Germans?
By the Germans, by the people who... Who is that?
The Verwalters, the people who were left in charge of the business.
The Germans appointed what they called Verwalters, people who took charge.
Charger, well, every U.S.
Antigran bookseller was produced at Verwalters.
All the Jewish booksellers had to work under a Verwalter.
How do you call it Verwalter?
V-E-R-W-A-L-T-E-R, Verwalter, which is something, it's a German word for... Custodian or... Yes, or... Custodian?
People... Well, they... They were the head of business.
Yeah, really the head of business.
They were allowed to do anything.
Anything goes.
And the Jewish booksellers were out of the business.
But how about the brains?
You know, of course, the whole point of the Jewish booksellers was their knowledge, too.
And so what they did is they just took the books and sold them to anyone?
No.
They sold their own sales.
Sales, auctions.
And they presented them to Hitler.
Yeah.
Because lava is built up in Linz.
Where in?
In Austria.
to some of your books the Germans took for their own libraries.
They were all lost.
They couldn't even bring charges to whoever to get back the books.
There were absolutely futile attempts.
Didn't work.
So how did they go about rebuilding?
Well,
No stock.
We had a small shop in the Leidse straat here.
My brothers are there.
And then we stopped.
A small shop in the Leidse straat, which is not very far from here.
And what are we going to do now?
Letterkunde?
Modern books.
We got a letter stock of by the reading for the book.
There's a Dutch association for the booksellers.
And they gave them a small stock of books to sell.
These were not Jewish booksellers, these were Dutch booksellers.
There was a Dutch booksellers, no.
So they helped you?
Yes.
Some reference material they got and some stock.
And that's it.
So then how did he build?
How did he...?
Slowly, but...
Slowly, slowly.
How big was the forraad?
A couple of hundred books.
That's it.
But the first time I saw a file, a file of people when we opened.
What did he say?
When we opened there was a queue of people waiting when they opened.
Really?
Because people, of course, all hunger for books.
Dutch people?
Yeah.
Dutch people, of course.
This was in 1946, 45?
46.
Here in Amsterdam?
Yeah.
There was a queue of people.
Now, how about the other book?
Didn't the other booksellers stay in business during the war?
Yes, most of them did.
But they can't have made a lot of money because the people's first interest was of course in food and drink.
So the war is over and were these collectors who were queued up or just people who liked to read?
No, the collectors were but no books.
There were collectors but no books.
Book collectors were more books.
There were more book collectors than books, yeah.
There were more book collectors than books.
And what kinds of things were they looking for?
What kinds of books?
The best books.
As ever.
As always, the best books, as always.
All collectors try to find, try to locate the best books.
So where did you start going to find books beyond your colleagues who gave you a small... A few options, but not many.
Not many.
So what was it that helped you come back and become very successful?
What is it in the nature of a bookseller?
The quality I'm looking for, yeah.
You tried to find books to sell.
There's a profit you made, you bought other books.
Whatever it is, you know.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
You buy, you sell, and you make a profit.
And from the profit, you try to buy other books.
Other books, and better books, and the books you've always wanted to sell and buy.
Because this, of course, after what was only a start.
After 50 years.
And you have to get back, you have to get into the direction of the books you'd like to buy and sell.
Because what they started with was, of course, not what they really
One people, their heart was in.
What kinds of books did you have before the war?
What kinds of books were lost?
Oh yeah, lots of books.
All kinds of books.
But also, but also, but very old.
But it was 16 and 17 eeel.
16 and 17 eeel, the vroege forraad.
A lot of 16th, 17th century, 18th century.
Really?
Yeah, I love that.
And you still have no idea where these books are?
No, you can't.
Well, part of it she put on a blanket in a garden and I let it stay.
Yeah, part of the stock they just removed from the premises and they put them outside in wind and rain under a sheet of stuff and it just went to room.
What was the name of the store before the war?
It was the same as it is now.
Really?
Yeah.
It was doing NV, yeah, Bemis or NV.
Then it was an NV, which is a sort of a large holding company.
Now it's called BV, which is American, I think, a limited corporation.
I see.
Bemis or BV.
And it was Bemis or NV before the war.
So this is, in fact, the old family business.
So this is the continuation?
Yes, yes.
My father started about 100 years ago and... Does Mr. Israel have children who will continue?
No.
This is a beautiful building, I have to say.
This building here is... Well, I didn't know it is from a society.
It's a society.
society for... who was a famous architect.
And they own about 70-75 houses in Amsterdam which they take care of.
And we rent it.
I never thought I could rent this shop.
And he's been rebuilding.
About 25 years.
In 1970 I started here.
1970.
And before is that a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a,
For booksellers.
For booksellers, yes.
That's a Rockefeller building.
You don't know anything?
Yes, yes, I've been there.
Same thing.
It started here and then I did not check up.
It didn't work.
And so I... How long is that?
A year?
About a year.
And then in 1970 I took it over.
So at the age, you're 81 years old now?
81, yes.
81.
And you're still, you're still working every day?
Yes, I do.
I love it.
And what gives you your greatest satisfaction?
To find books.
Extraordinary books.
Books that matter.
And how do you know that?
How do you know a book that's important when you see it?
Where does that come from?
Experience.
Sometimes you do, sometimes you don't.
So at the age of 81, you still get excited when you find a good book?
Sure!
And you see it in him?
What's the response?
It's when we buy at auction, for instance, and we get the parcel home, five or six books, and then the real work starts.
Bibliographically, you dive into it and try to find out what's in it.
And the first hunch sometimes is the best.
excellent books also less less good books but mostly the books are very good and then you check it and you find out this is a major book medically scientifically and that's that's what you're looking for that's when you're happy and then the nice part is perhaps even over the finding it and the buying it that's the nice part and then then it has to wait for a customer now at the age of 81 are you buying for stock yes you're buying for stock yes still do isn't that great
I love that.
Not in huge amounts, but we try to keep up.
But you understand what I'm saying.
But he's going to buy the book.
Yes.
That's the key point.
You're not thinking of a particular customer, is what I'm trying to say.
Dangerous.
The book has to be...
It has to stand or fall.
The book is important.
It's a funny thing to say, but the customer is perhaps even less important.
The customer will eventually come for this particular book.
But the book has to be a very good book.
It has to be a top book.
Now, where do you go to the auctions?
Where are the auctions?
London.
He travels?
No, no, no.
We bid by commission or people who visit for us.
So you look at catalogs?
Yes.
Major part of the day.
And you decide the books that you want?
Check it bibliographically, reference.
Yeah, and check how rare it is and how nice and how important.
I look for books which more or less changed the world.
In a certain... Scientific metaphor, right?
In a certain amount, you know.
It is... It's a book... Inventions, for instance.
What makes the world better.
Can you give me some examples of books that changed the world?
Helmholtz, for instance, or The Augenspiegel.
on the eyes, the ophthalmoscope, small, which is still used today.
Jenner on the cowpox.
Jenner, for instance, on cowpox.
Can you just write down some of these points?
Sure, there are a couple of them in the catalog too.
Okay, good.
Maybe you could just check them off for me in the book.
The Helmholtz, Auswriting the Craft.
So books... Well, the science figures.
We changed the science.
How did you develop a specialty in science and that?
Well, during my time that I was hidden, I had to do something.
So I studied and I took medicine and history of sciences I took as a subject.
Well how did you study while you were in hiding?
Did you have books available?
I had a few books with me.
So you were hiding and you had books with you?
Yes, a small box.
So he studied while he was in hiding?
You had to, of course, get through the day.
That was, that was of major importance.
Where did he have the, did people bring books to him?
Have people brought you books?
No, no.
No.
He wasn't caught.
That one wasn't caught.
Another one was caught, yeah?
So for all the time you were in hiding?
Yes, I studied.
You studied.
You have to do something.
I don't know, if you know, if you have 12 hours before you.
And, and... You were in a farmhouse, you said, in Heidegger?
A small... No, it was not a farmhouse.
It was a very small... ...house.
In the, in the... In the center of a wood... What was it?
A forester.
The man taking care of the... It was a forester.
Just give me an idea of where that is.
With regard to where we are now, Arnhem, was it close to Arnhem?
Yeah, it was, uh, 30 miles from Arnhem.
Fifteen miles, or 30 kilometers.
About 15 miles in the woods.
In the woods.
Around Arnhem, that's the only place in Holland where it would have some importance, because the rest of Holland is all flat.
And what kind of a house does a forester have?
Is it like a... It's a fastball.
Fastball, but secluded, secluded.
Was the forester a friend of your family's?
No.
I got by luck.
If you will overcome such a thing, you have to have luck.
The only thing that you need.
If you go to Switzerland, you have to have luck.
Or bad luck.
But to come through such a while, you have to have luck.
And you lost family members, I understand.
Hmm?
You lost members of your family.
Yeah.
My mother was caught, and my oldest brother, and three of my sisters.
Did you know this during the war, or did you find out afterwards?
Well, you wasn't so, no.
You didn't realize it before.
Well, that you see with all people who come in an occupation, you know.
They don't know what happens.
Nobody knows.
And your younger brother, where was he during the war?
How did, how did he... Yeah, well, it's a whole story, but he went... He married, and then he went to Switzerland.
Oh, he was in Switzerland.
Yeah, he has a connection there.
He had connections.
who brought him... to the next of the war, you two were reunited?
No.
He was in the army and... Well, that's another story.
He'll tell you this afternoon.
He was on the phone just now, so... Oh, that was Nico then?
Was he the brother?
Did you tell him I'm here?
I told you we were in conversation with you.
Yes, I'm seeing it in a second.
And I'll leave you to it, he said, so.
Oh, good.
This is quite a story.
This is quite a... Yeah.
Everybody has done a story about his life.
Is that?
Every man has a story.
Every man.
And to me, of course, you live to take... to pass on books, to find books.
Mm-hmm.
This is, this is a, you know, look at, look at the books, look at what you've done to... Well, I bought them the world over, I can tell you.
Yeah.
I was, I went to, you know, Europe was easy, easier.
Then I went to America.
And then I went to Japan.
And then you were a publisher too.
You, you became a publisher as well.
Sure, a little bit.
That's unusual.
Look, it stopped raining outside.
It's a miracle.
I can send you a list of what we've reprinted and published.
Here in Europe, it is unusual that an antiquary or bookseller also becomes a publisher.
At a certain moment, it was a trance.
There was a trend.
It came up and all the print books, who were still good, were reprinted.
Well, I got from an English friend of mine who gave me his ID.
And
How do you decide which books to reprint?
Again, it's his knowledge that he gathered while he was studying and then
How do you know a book is good?
You know it just looking at it, when you pick it up, you say the books have to be good.
How do you know?
How do you know when a book is good?
That is, well... Six cents.
After 50 or 60 years, it becomes a six cents, I think.
Well, it's a feeling.
It's a feeling.
You start, you start, well... Ten years in the business now, but it's...
I'm beginning to feel that I've got some ground under my feet at the moment, after 10 years, which is what you need, basically, at least, to get along in this place.
What does Mr. Israel teach you?
What have you learned from him?
Books in general.
Whenever there's a book in a catalogue, now it's less than before, but we used to walk to the reference shelves.
could be in there, could be in there, could be in there.
So you'll learn along the way.
It's facts, facts, facts.
You can only learn about it.
Mostly you learn about practice.
Practice.
Handle the books.
Handling the books.
Yes.
Find out why you don't.
Buying and selling.
Find out why you have to buy there.
What's the most important thing in selling?
Knowing what the book is so you can explain to the customer why it is important.
Especially now, blind.
Because we don't sell what you call nice beautiful bindings, for instance, are on a second category.
Because what we need are the books that are of major importance, medically and scientifically.
What they look like is perhaps, it's important but it's less important.
If it's a unity of a major book in a major binding,
in fantastic condition, that's lovely, that's the best you can have, but normally we're not very choosy about condition, because it has to be, the text has to be... Do you encounter books that are important, that you've never heard of before, but you know immediately are important when you see them?
Does that happen?
Or does he pretty much know the books when he sees them?
No, sometimes you do it by intuition, you write them.
Intuition.
It's a feeling.
It's a good feeling.
This is a book.
Figure speeches are phenomenal.
No, that's good.
Yes.
No, intuition is good.
You have a feeling about a book that it's important.
Of course, you have to know.
And then, mostly you are right, but sometimes you are wrong.
Who basically buys these books?
What kinds of people?
or librarians and collectors.
But libraries, generally, and medical schools... Last few years, not so many buyers from the institutions, but... Why is that?
Budgets have been cut dramatically, I think.
A year or so ago, we dispatched this catalogue in 2,000 copies all over the world.
Six or 700 to America.
And we received, I think, two address corrections.
from America, on six or seven hundred.
And the major institutions were all there.
The Library of Congress.
And they didn't buy more.
Nothing.
Not a single bit.
So that's a disappointment, but... The US is not buying.
Do you have any idea why?
I don't know.
I know why, because they're putting their money into computers.
Ah, I see.
Information technology.
Yeah, and it's very sad, but I'm writing about that too.
You know.
Whenever they do buy, it's the private people.
It's the private collectors.
So when have you noticed this trend?
For how long have you noticed this trend that the medical schools and universities are buying as much as they used to?
Yeah, well.
Yeah, they got me in the subsidy.
They haven't got the money.
So last, I think, last time.
Well,
Yeah, private people in that too.
But there are a lot of private collectors, especially medical men, psychologists, psychiatrists in America, and a lot of them on urologists, cardiologists.
How important to you is condition?
Very important.
It is important.
Condition is important to everyone, isn't it?
Yes, it is.
All right.
But I still maintain that it's in our line of business, medical and scientific,
Perhaps sometimes it's not as important as the text itself.
It is the text.
You don't think that you'll ever see any of these books scanned and put on computers, do you?
Technology is there.
It's possible that people won't be sitting in front of a visual display unit for six to eight hours a day.
I thought that was my team.
No, no, no, no.
People will always want to handle books, smell the books, feel the books, and scan them with the brain.
Like this.
And that's much faster than a computer.
Where is most of your business?
Here or abroad?
Outside.
Yeah, outside.
95% overall.
What is the state of book culture in Holland?
Book culture in general.
Very good.
The interest in books in general speaking, yeah, that's very good.
Collecting is another matter.
But the interest in books is very, very good.
A lot of exhibitions, a lot of research, a lot of new publications every year, dozens of them.
But the buying, the collectors... Do you ever expect to retire?
Yes, I do.
What do you think?
I see a man who comes to work every day, is what I see.
I like what I see.
You've got the knowledge here.
Why not use it?
But you still get a great deal of satisfaction.
When you find a great book, you're happy.
We're all excited.
You have a dash if you find a good book.
There are so few good books in the world.
There are so few good books?
Yeah.
Well, how many?
A lot, of course, but how many can you get your hands on?
See, we're having a good interview.
What do you think?
What areas do you think would be good for me to cover with him?
Well, as scientists, I'm not so... My brother is my... I love my showy books.
I'm not so sure.
Showy books are what they say.
Showy, is that what you say?
They're really, really... When it's called a place,
memorial bindings.
And bindings and... I like the text.
The text is, for me, the most important.
So, I'm still trying to get the sense of discovery when you find a book.
You say you see this with him every day.
What happens?
Tell me... Give me an example of a book, if you can just...
pick a book that might represent a recent discovery, at the point at which you realise you have something really, really interesting, you know?
Well, I think, you know that before, is that a decent task, as well as you don't buy it.
What did he say?
You have to know, when you see the book, well, I can give you one example without going into particulars.
Look at the Kilmers name, the Kilmers.
Kulmus is a book, a medical book.
K-U-L-M-U-S.
It's an anatomical book, an anatomical play, 1734.
And it's a major book, a book of major importance because of the relationship between Holland and Japan.
It was a basic text for the Japanese to translate.
And we found the copy a couple of times ago.
We saw it in the catalogue, and that's it.
And you know, there's the Kulmus.
We've never seen it.
Miss Rizal has had it one time before, I think.
It's quite rare.
It's super rare.
There it is.
Staring you in the place.
You all get all excited.
And you can't find any other copies in the auction package.
You can't.
For years.
You have to check in Amsterdam University.
They have a copy, thank God, so we can check and look.
And then the battle begins.
It was an auction.
It was an auction and we had it.
Did everybody else, did other people know this was important?
It was, it was relatively... Sure.
I don't know if you can tell it.
It was low profile.
Well, I can tell you what it is.
It is one of some books which are important for the development of religion in Japan.
It's a basic text.
On Western base.
European Western base.
But it's very important in Japan.
Yes, because they translated the book and took it as the basis for anatomy in Japan.
And you know roughly what the title is?
Anatomische tafelum.
Anatomical tables.
Okay, I can check this out.
And so this was being offered where at auction?
That's a bit... How shall we say it?
This is a bit...
If we divulge that, the client who's bought it recently will be able to check back.
That's a bit sensitive.
It was abroad.
That's good, I understand.
But don't mind me asking.
So you saw this thing in an auction abroad.
We put in a bid by fax and that was amazing because we thought there's always a chance that you don't have it.
And you don't really know what to bid.
You don't really know how many contestants.
And still we had it.
So we were lucky.
And then you sold it to an institution or to an individual?
To an individual.
Immediately?
Who we knew wanted the book so very much.
So before you passed it on, did you have a chance to look at it and handle it?
Yes.
How long did you keep it in-house?
A couple, at least a month or two months.
So you kept it for a while?
Yes.
And you charged it.
That's a great example.
That's what I'm looking for.
It goes to a collector and you have to say goodbye to it.
The most interesting book I had was Harvey.
So tell me about Harvey.
That's blood, that's the circulation of blood.
The heart is a pump.
Sixty-eight.
One of the greatest books I've ever had.
And how often has that passed through your hands?
One.
And where did you find that?
Well, I was offered by a professor.
I sold it to America.
You sold it to America?
To a collector again, or to a... Yeah, to a bookshelf.
To a bookshelf.
Who long along is that?
It sure is.
30 years ago.
But so few copies are known of Harvey.
It's a rare book.
It's really a rare book, I mean, great book.
That is a rare book, you know.
And of course we talk about Copernicus and that, that, those... Also a rare book.
So are there still many great books in private homes that people don't know about?
I can tell you, it's very hard to find.
But the last few years there's been a tendency to put a lot of private collections into the auction houses.
So the dealers are sort of not in the game anymore.
We've not been offered a really interesting good collection in recent times.
Which is a pity because that's what you need every now and again.
A good library with a few hundred good titles.
It doesn't happen anymore.
Most of the people go to auctions.
They see that, they fetch nice, high prices, London, New York, anywhere, Germany.
So you have to compete in the auction room instead of discussing... Are there still pretty good auctions here in Amsterdam?
Or are they mostly abroad?
The auctions that are important for us are mostly abroad.
We have a couple of nice Dutch auction houses.
We'll have some nice material every now and again, but... Good.
You know, I think we've covered a lot.
We've got an hour, which is... I'd love to take a couple of pictures, if he doesn't mind.
Yeah.
Applied just.
Sure.
Excellent.
So you've read my book?
Yeah.
Oh, good.
I'm beginning to read it.
I see.
Well, you'll be in the new book, so...
Yes.
What do you think?
You think this is a profession that will continue into the next century?
You think there will be booksellers?
Well, there will be booksellers, yes.
I think so.
Sure.
It's the most interesting profession you can have in your life.
Always interested in things, even in modern things, because everything has
So I also got a nation with history.
It's us.
And you have a young associate here who's helping you in the business?
Yes.
Is this basically the shop, you two here?
Do you have any... Yes, this is what we... I hope so.
And one lady who helps us in the print room and with bookkeeping.
So you work with prints as well?
Yes.
I'll set it now, only in... Sideline.
That's important at the moment, because things are okay.
These are the things that people collect.
Yes.
Or buy for a souvenir.
This is terrific.
And what was this book here, since I have a picture of it?
It's a Bible.
It's a pure Bible, beginning of the 18th century.
In Holland, a Bible is a very important book.
Every home in Holland has a Bible in any form.
A little bit civilized.
A Dutchman has a Bible in his family.
No, but they're not rare books, are they?
And yet the value is personal.
Apart from the very early ones, the Bible isn't really a rare book.
But some of them are excruciatingly rare.
But then you begin, well, the early German Bibles, of course.
Of course, there must be great association books, which people have written.
Well, it says half a pint.
Association books are very hard.
Let me ask you a question.
There was a book published in Holland last year.
Did Libri in an interesting fashion?
I don't, but I did an interview with Pierre Brez in France.
Oh, yeah, I can understand.
And he went crazy about it.
He said he thinks Libri was a brilliant bookman.
He was.
Oh, he was, sure.
And he said to me, you have to read this.
And a scientist.
And I said, I couldn't believe he was showing so much admiration for this thief.
I couldn't.
As a matter of fact, as a man who did no books, well, I can tell you it was one of the best of the sometimes.
Libri was one of the best.
So you have respect for his mind.
For his mind, but not for his actions.
That is interesting, the booksellers respect.
Beres said, he said, read this book, read the man's knowledge.
So that's why I've been... He was also a great man.
Is this a nation?
Yeah, it's by Verloren, from Hilversum.
It's brand new, and I saw it a few years.
Nobody has it in the United States.
I have it at home, too.
And I figured, well, while I'm here, I'll try.
But if you can get it and send it to me.
Is it in Dutch, or isn't it?
No, it's in English.
It's in English.
It's a collaboration between a Dutch author and, I think, Italian.
And it had a wonderful review on the book collector, too.
Yeah.
It had a huge... But you have to have the time to read it, because it's... I'm not wrong going, but it's...
You have to dig into it.
How about you say?
Trenchant might be the word.
Yeah, because there's a lot of information.
So I can contact you for... You can take these two.
I can take these two.
Any extra information you'd like, please call us.
This is wonderful.
And it stopped raining, too.
And so he usually needs them at one o'clock.
And lunch, and then from half-past two to...
So he puts in a pretty good day?
Yes.
And what is a typical day like for you here in the store?
What does it involve?
Mail.
A stack of mail.
Checking.
And then the catalogues.
Reading, reading, reading.
Reading catalogues.
Checking.
And then checking.
Finding an item you'd like to check further.
Reference library, reference library.
Do you find things?
Every day?
Every day, no.
Sometimes you check a catalog with a thousand items and there's really nothing worthwhile in it.
And who writes the catalogs, the two of you?
This last one, I've done a lot.
You did.
And how extensive is your research library?
Pretty, 2600, about 3000 items.
And how important is a good research reference library?
Without it we couldn't be in business.
I have a small reference library myself at home, about 2300.
I've been building that for 10 years.
It's essential.
Because you can't know everything.
You know a lot, but you have to check a lot.
You have to know where to check, that's important.
Nobody can know all.
Has the internet helped you a lot?
Not yet, because we haven't got a computer yet.
We're on the net, but we don't use a computer.
I have a computer at home, which I use.
Yeah, you'll find.
Is it difficult to surf the net?
Is it worthwhile?
Do you find what you're looking for?
It's getting better.
The structures in it will have to improve.
The thing is, you can check that you can get onto the Biotech National catalog.
And Harvard.
I do all my work with Harvard from home.
So I check their catalog.
So when I get there, I go straight in to the books.
I don't fool around.
I know if they have it.
It would be a major tool for us to check.
It's a good library.
Yeah, but also I check the catalog on the computer.
At home.
On the internet.
Want meneer heeft het internet.
How heet het?
De print van het scherm had hij bij zich.
Daarom heeft hij ons naam en adres en alles ook gevonden.
It's a major tool.
It's going to be a major tool.
And then for this new book that I'm writing.
Simon here.
And you were saying that you studied English literature at the University of Amsterdam, and then you studied library... Yeah, book and library science.
Book and library science.
Also... But there you only learned the basic things about typography.
And that was where, also at Amsterdam?
Amsterdam University.
Okay.
But then, you also said at that point you made a decision in order to deal with books and not be a teacher, I guess.
And at first I tried to get into the public libraries or the scientific libraries, a job there in the rare book department, but
as it went in Holland at that time, ten years ago.
No budgets, no people who had positions.
So I thought, what now?
And the next thing I did was write to, I think 20, 25 antiquarian booksellers in Holland, presenting myself.
And there were a few reactions, 10 or 12 letters back, I'm sorry, no people needed.
And Miss Riesel phoned me, all of a sudden out of the blue.
Somebody's leaving my firm and...
Would you like to come for a conversation?
I'm a doctor analyst.
So I finished university and didn't write my dissertation.
He's not at home?
You can give a try later on in the day.
Maybe I could call the university too.
Yeah, of course.
Maybe if we could get the phone number of the university library.
It's in the beginning.
Thank you.